Title: I Love Data
Date: 2008-07-07 08:22
Author: Jonathan Lange (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: i-love-data

At work, we recently started to graph the time it takes to access a
branch in Launchpad via SSH, both on our staging and production
servers.  
  
I love this so much. Having this data is <span>liberating</span>. It's
like turning on a light in a dark room: suddenly I can go from
uncertain, careful, hesitant steps to bold, confident strides.  
  
In fact, the metaphor stretches further. This new light has revealed
objects of interest (that is, spikes in the time taken) that I wasn't
aware of before. I need to know how long these spikes last, how they
correlate with load on the system and so forth. Soon there'll be more
graphs, and I'll be able to correlate them and analyze them and suck on
their delicious, numerical marrow (the light metaphor long abandoned).  
  
Regardless of whether it's liberating illumination or nourishing,
savoury meat, this new graph makes me wonder why I don't chart other
things I care about. Having such graphs would help me see the
<span>impact</span> of my actions. I could chart things like my bank
balance, my waistline or the number of Latin words I learned this week.
Then I could answer questions like "do I spend more on Tuesdays?" or
"can I afford this iPod/cake/gerund?". This is important, because when I
am tempted with a sleek/delicious/perplexing iPod/cake/gerund, I fall
back on my own judgment. I think it's time to confess, dear reader, that
my own judgment isn't very good. And yet I continue to trust it.  
  
The reason I don't have such graphs is that they are inconvenient to
maintain. A graph of branch access times is <span>easy</span>. All you
need to do is describe how to get the measurement, and then do a bit of
once-off set up. If you want to graph your body weight, you need to get
on the scales at a fixed time and then look at the dial and adjust for
parallax and then write a number down somewhere and maybe note down
whether this is before or after a meal and then take the number and then
add it to a spreadsheet. Most online banking sites I've seen are even
<span>less</span> convenient than this.  
  
Getting data on life is hard, but for programming it's easy. What things
do you care about on your project? Features, user experience, how fast
bugs get fixed? Can you quantify these things? Can you make a pretty
picture out of it? If so, do it now! Post your answers here, set up
something like<span></span> [Cricket](http://cricket.sourceforge.net/)
and then profit!  
  
P.S. I can't believe I got to the end of this post without saying how
awesome the Canonical sysadmins are. Let me correct that now. The
Canonical sysadmins are heck of awesome. They could [simply walk into
Mortor](http://cdn-www.i-am-bored.com/media/95709_mordoranim8.gif).

