Title: UDS
Date: 2009-11-23 12:00
Author: Jonathan Lange (noreply@blogger.com)
Slug: uds

<div>

I'm back in London after a mammoth two weeks travelling the globe
bringing [Launchpad](https://launchpad.net) joy to its four corners.

</div>

<div>

First up I went to Mooloolaba, Australia. If you're Australian, you
probably know how to pronounce it. If you aren't, you'll probably never
get it. Sorry.

</div>

<div>

I was there with the Canonical Bazaar team and some other Launchpadders,
talking about their next few months of development. They are going to be
focusing on helping Launchpad and the Ubuntu platform team work on our
daily build initiative. Hmm. I really need a place to link to for that
last one, don't I?

</div>

<div>

Mooloolaba is a beautiful place to be in November. If you are thinking
of giving me something for Christmas, consider a holiday apartment
there.

</div>

<div>

After Mooloolaba, I crossed the Pacific to reach Dallas, home of the
twenty-eight lane highway. I didn't really get into the city that much,
but man, [UDS](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UDS-L?action=show&redirect=UDS)
was great.

</div>

<div>

Most of the people there are directly involved in Ubuntu development.
It's such a joy to see so many people from all over the world come
together to work on Ubuntu, and an honour to think that I have a place
in that work.

</div>

<div>

I spent most of the conference flitting from room to room, going to
sessions about the Ubuntu development process, [daily
builds](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/DailyBuilds) and the [Software
Centre](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/SoftwareCenter). Occasionally, I cheated
a bit and went to a random session that interested me. Mostly it was
about [Quickly](https://launchpad.net/quickly).

</div>

<div>

As a Launchpad developer, one of the most exciting things about this UDS
was seeing that Ubuntu developers have started building [their own tools
around Launchpad using our API](https://help.launchpad.net/API/Uses).
Many of these tools are things we'd love to integrate with the main web
app, but many are things that are *so* Ubuntu policy specific that we're
happy to leave them outside. After all, this is exactly

</div>

<div>

what the API is about.

</div>

<div>

I did a short plenary session where I hacked up [an API
script](https://code.edge.launchpad.net/~jml/+junk/bugstats) using
[launchpadlib](https://help.launchpad.net/API/launchpadlib) and
demonstrated it live. After the presentation, many people came up to me
and started talking about their API-using programs and their experience
making them. The amount of interest really surprised me.

</div>

<div>

I also ran a couple of workshop / discussions. The first was on
improving Launchpad for API use, which was a bit disorganized, since I
didn't realize I was supposed to be running it. The second was on
getting started with Launchpad hacking.

</div>

<div>

For the "Getting started with Launchpad hacking" session, I passed
around a USB stick, and asked the audience for an API within Launchpad
to expose. [mdz](http://mdzlog.alcor.net/) suggested "blueprints", so I
went to expose the 'drafter' element of a specification. In front of a
room full of people. Sheesh.

</div>

<div>

If you think pair programming is hard (it is, and if you think it isn't
you are either doing it wrong or you have extremely helpful colleagues),
programming in front of a room full of people is harder.

</div>

<div>

Still, we managed to actually expose the API and [propose the branch for
merging](https://code.edge.launchpad.net/~jml/launchpad/expose-blueprints/+merge/15060)
with only a little bit of evil.

</div>

<div>

The point of the session was to get people set up with Launchpad
development environments, to show them how to even begin to expose a
method over the API but even more than that, to give people a little
push into just giving Launchpad development a try. By blundering my way
into a valid patch, I think maybe we succeeded.

</div>

<div>

Now UDS is over and I'm back in London, jetlagged and exhausted to be
sure, but genuinely happy about the plans we have for Launchpad
development, and eager to begin to make them happen.

</div>
